language is weird and swearing is maybe
the weirdest thing we do with it oh most
words are fine avocado sasketch one
amphibian dog entity but use these other
words and suddenly it's all uh sir this
is a funeral that's not appropriate
language also why are you wearing that
dinosaur costume also please stop openly
taking schedule 1 substances during the
reading of the eulogy
[Music]
jesus we may as well start with perhaps
the ultimate naughty mouth noise which
we'll just substitute with the german
philosopher kant in a futile attempt to
avoid youtube demonetization the words
can't roots are probably germanic we
don't know how the word got started but
we do know that the strength of the word
has changed over time
chaucer used a cousin word quaint openly
in the 14th century shakespeare was
writing puns with it in the 17th century
and today like many swears it functions
as the lowest insult and at the same
time the highest compliment in many
parts of the world one might be called a
stupid cat but in australia he's a right
good cat is tall praise indeed same goes
for he's the [ __ ] just remove the
definite article and the meaning is
exactly the opposite likewise bollocks
can mean false information or the dog's
bollocks something brilliant then
there's [ __ ] the beloved old faithful of
the english tongue it probably comes
from germanic or indo-european possibly
for to strike and it is flexible it can
function as an adjective is that a
[ __ ] penguin as an adverb this
penguin is [ __ ] unhinged yo
intransitive verb this penguin [ __ ] or
even as a verbal noun that penguin has
an assault rifle i think we're about to
receive quite the [ __ ] and judging by
the fact that official documents from
the middle ages mention gentlemen with
names such as the upstanding john
lefucker we can guess that like the word
can't [ __ ] probably wasn't always as
strong as it is today anyway words don't
just change in severity but they also
mutate to be nice once meant to be
foolish to amuse meant to deceive then
there's toilet a noun borrowed from the
middle french word twal meaning a little
piece of cloth next it came to mean the
cloth that covers a dressing table then
the things on the dressing table then
the dressing table itself then the whole
process of getting ready for the day and
then morphed into its current form the
disgustatorium we know and love in any
case cursing and insults probably work
not because of the sound of the words
themselves but because they are
metaphors if you screw up and the
serbian person tells you you just [ __ ]
the hedgehogs back it's clearly not that
you literally crippled a poor hedgehog
but that you are in general regrettably
an idiot likewise in latin calling
someone a public poop pile clearly just
meant they were worthless or in russian
if someone threatens you with me i'm
gonna show you where the crayfish
hibernates really of course they just
mean actually i have no idea with this
one but sounds good doesn't it and some
languages don't even really have
profanity but the one we're speaking in
now does it is a technology it is a gift
because the real genius of our species
is in language and the genius of
language is in cursing and it's more
complicated than that because to even
get that some words are bad in the first
place you have to understand register
phonology semantics all of which we're
doing all day every day automatically
right now in fact meaning get a load of
you 10 out of 10 no notes you're a
linguistic primate whatever happens even
if everything's gone to [ __ ] even if
you're miserably listening to this in
the bath drinking vodka and shampoo
because you ran out of mixers you have
the superpower of language meaning golly
g you are doing one hecking success
are you drinking your mother's shampoo
again
dad
shut the [ __ ] up if you're listening to
this then congratulations you've already
acquired a language but of course none
of us remember doing it really new
humans usually spend a large amount of
their time vocalizing meaningless
nonsense some people continue this far
past infancy it's called babbling even
fresh out of the oven we're already
trying to talk then between 9 and 18
months usually come our first words in
english generally mama dada or oh god i
exist make it stop by year two most of
us have at least 150 words licked and by
three we will simply not shut up then
most of us will go on to nail the four
main aspects of wordy noises phonology
that's the sound of speech semantics
that's vocabulary and meaning grammar
and syntax learning how words fit
together and pragmatics knowing what's
even appropriate to say and when and
just as children acquire language
presumably civilization had to too too
what please permit this stock image of a
confused llama to signify we don't know
so did language first begin in our
hunter-gatherer past as just simple
nouns
and what was the first language well
tamil is the oldest living language
thousands of years old even and still
spoken by about 80 million people today
but again bruh and did an enlargening of
the human brain make language possible
or did language encourage enlargements
of the brain
evolution is sociopathic but it isn't
usually wasteful so what problem did our
distant ancestors have to solve that was
so complicated we had to evolve not just
simple verbal communication but the
capacity to memorize and use thousands
and thousands of words why did our
ancestors need the ability to say uh
homies i don't mean to be egregious but
is that a rather sizable apex predator
over there rather than just ah [ __ ] lion
[ __ ] maybe it was for negotiation maybe
for laying down sick diss tracks we have
no idea then again we don't even know
where we yawn yet so you know baby steps
still if we stick with english for now
we do know a fair bit just like greek
hindi catalan and many other languages
english has its roots in
proto-indo-european
a language we've had to reconstruct
probably spoken about 6 000 years ago by
a bunch of cats who lived between the
black sea and the caspian sea through a
combination of the standard human
pastimes of wandering around and
shagging each other language families
probably grew out of proto-indo-european
germanic began to evolve then came
anglo-frisian old english middle english
and finally the patchwork tongue we're
using now and just 10 seconds of
watching what you're saying in english
will reveal what a patchwork tongue it
is do you like waffles what is do doing
there exactly you like waffles or i know
like waffles is not only more efficient
it's the structure plenty of other
languages use perfectly well or o-u-g-h
which can be used simultaneously to
spell do cough bow through and if you're
learning english at the moment i'm just
so sorry we don't get it either in fact
english is one of the only languages
that can have competitions for spelling
many languages can't do this it's too
easy because they use phonetic spelling
because they're not [ __ ] mental yukt
descent choreograph english stop it get
some help and it's kinda telling that
once indoctrinated into english is
madness if someone breaks the rules we
know even if we can't explain what the
rule is this sentence now become loads
weird syntax because all jumble ryan
reynolds or the fact that in english
descriptions generally have to go
opinion size age shape color origin
material purpose noun and only in that
order or we get upset a lovely big new
blue fluffy polyester cap bed is fine a
polyester blue catbed lovely big new
fluffy strongly suggests those thc
gummies have just kicked in hard or
register which is basically knowing
which words to use in the context of
communicating there are a few registers
in english but let's just say we're
usually talking formally or informally
and it's not always obvious which
register to use you may have found
yourself in one of those [ __ ]
interviews with a hey we're all friends
at the company vibe where they insist
you speak your mind and just be honest
but if they ask what you do for fun and
as requested you reply honestly well in
my free time i like smoking massive
rocks of crack cocaine
i'd say my biggest weakness is
perfectionism it is highly unlikely you
will be offered the position but
arguably the most interesting feature of
almost all languages is displacement or
rather we can talk about things
somewhere else in time and space none of
us will live to see it but we can have a
chat about paris in 500 years or
patagonia 500 years ago likewise you're
not here but i can tell you it's
currently 1am in europe i'm sat in front
of two monitors with a word document and
a beer the cat is sleeping on the desk
the light is fairly dim and you probably
imagined something like this which
doesn't sound like a remarkable skill
but it is it's literally telepathy it's
[ __ ] mind-reading because language
isn't just for pointing it is the ether
in which we distribute abstractions it's
possible without words even there's no
official name for an ellipsis followed
by a question mark but the meaning is
universally understood as uh what the
[ __ ] and the fact that we immediately
get this tells us that humans have
evolved way past the era of pointing and
entered into the age of signification
and metaphor things mean deeper things
sometimes was captain oates just going
for a walk was moby dick just about a
whale are those baby on board signs just
about the baby on board and if you
happen to be the sort of person who
likes to blow off a little steam by
indiscriminately careening into other
motor vehicles at top speed but you
suddenly notice this sign would you
avoid that car for some reason or is the
purpose of the sign really just to tell
you that the people driving the car
successfully boned at least once we get
it you reproduced well done etc etc etc
this is messier 13. it's a fairly
cramped globular galaxy about 25 000
light years away and in 1974 we detected
this signal coming from messier 13. the
signal is composed of frequency
modulated radio waves shifting by 10
hertz and out of this you get ones and
zeros that correspond to
1679 digits which is weird because
that's a semi-prime a number divisible
by itself one and two other prime
numbers 23 and 73. so you arrange the
ones and zeros on a grid 23 by 73
squares and you get these shapes it's
hard to imagine this is from a natural
astronomical event but if it's a message
it's even harder to imagine what it
means because i'm playing of course this
is a message we sent to messier 13 not
the other way around but it bears
hammering home that if we want to
establish contacts with intelligent life
beyond earth not to imply there's any on
earth universal messages are going to be
like really tricky the messier 13 signal
we sent is called the arecibo message
and it looks in full like this there are
seven components first is a primer the
numbers one to ten in binary then some
representations of human dna then an
approximation of us and our population
then our solar system and which planet
it is sending the message earth then the
aracebo radio telescope that sent the
message itself the message only has
another oh 24 955 years to go before
arriving but when it does and if it
reaches messier 13 in about 12 more
jesus cycles it's gonna be a bit of a
doozy to decode because we're assuming
in the first place that aliens will
understand that this is binary or
whatever their analog of binary is next
that the messier thirteeners will know
this is dna or that they even understand
nucleotide biology then that they will
ensure this is an organism not a
structure or a continent then that this
is a solar system not an appendage or a
reproductive organ or something and then
that this is a machine and that's all
assuming they even use symbolic language
in the first place to be fair the
message was more sent ceremonially than
a real hello but still when you think
about it how do you send an unambiguous
message to beings of unknown psychology
well it's bad enough with us there are a
fair few writing systems by our own
species that we still can't decipher
like bible script in lebanon or linear a
in crete and that's not to mention
nuclear semiotics which is the study of
well we produce a lot of nuclear waste
and the stuff we don't recycle need
somewhere to go because it's hella
dangerous and it stays dangerous for
thousands of years oh well we'll put it
somewhere then okay but in the hardly
implausible event that civilization
collapses entirely and say in the
distant future our great great great
great grandchildren discover our sights
full of nuclear waste we need some way
of telling them this radioactive stuff
will make you dead don't put it up your
bottom and if today's languages are
forgotten by them how do you write that
warning without words oh that's easy
just yeah really because that could mean
death it could also just be a drum kit
depending on how morbid your culture is
or okay how about this so left to right
that's obvious yeah unless they read
right to left like literally millions of
humans do today in which case it isn't
so much the nuclear waste kills you
rather that it brings you back from the
[ __ ] dead oh but it's obvious there's
arrows yeah what does an arrow mean if
you've never seen an actual arrow and on
top of that even if we crack universal
messaging even if aliens receive and
read our nonsense would they care we are
the way we are because of evolutionary
pressure because of our specific climb
up the tree of life we could have ended
up looking a thousand other ways perhaps
we could have ended up thinking a
thousand other ways is it universal for
other intelligent species in the
universe to be curious or linguistic or
social or even give a damn about looking
across the knights for other mines who
knows but we're trying to find them and
the aracebo message is hardly the only
message we've sent to the heavens
between april 2051 and november 2069 the
human sent message cosmic call 1 will be
arriving in the constellation cygnus and
sejita respectively between july 2047
and february 2017 the teenage message
will make its way to the constellations
ursa major cassiopeia and a few others
then cosmic call 2 hello from earth and
a bunch more whether received or not in
transit currently are our first tries
hello our name is our fledgling
electromagnetic attempts to introduce
ourselves to the great neighborhood but
even then even if those messages reach
other beings even if those beings
understand what they're reading
considering just how young we are
technologically it is entirely possible
that more advanced civilizations may
well perceive us as babies still stuck
at our early vocalization stage babbling
at adults as those adults silently wait
for us to begin the quests of learning
cosmic grammar as we continue like
featherless birds chirping desperately
across the dark forests
[Music]
[Applause]
[Laughter]
talking of which perhaps you've been to
one of these fancy international meetups
that capital cities like arranging
sometimes and the native speakers of
widely used languages will usually seek
each other out and the brits and the
americans will inevitably start
chuckling amongst themselves at the tiny
differences in their vocabulary oh you
say trunk we say boot oh you say cause
light we say horse piss etc while just a
few feet away will be standing someone
who uses a completely different system
of writing and grammar someone from
georgia or tibet or wherever who won't
be receiving anywhere near as much
attention for some reason someone who
genuinely has linguistic differences
just look at georgian he's gorgeous it's
georgious but when it comes to language
we seem to be fascinated with similar
differences not different similars which
is maybe why for all of our looking out
to the stars for talking aliens we seem
a little indifferent about the fact that
aliens are sort of already here and
there's about eight million species of
them
this apprentice chunker is called freya
she's four years old she likes tuna and
when she's really chill she presents the
jelly beans for inspection freya has
never uttered a word before but she does
sort of say things to me especially when
she's hungry
you already have food what's this or
rather she's probably saying i want
something make you do thing i want you
bipedal furless oik if communication is
trying to put things from your head into
other heads then this is kind of
communication and though her and i share
a common ancestor and though we both
enjoy idleness and biographical dramas
her mind is pretty unknowable to me and
i'm quite sure her reality is unknowable
to me too if this little lion could
speak i would not understand her sort of
talking aliens are already here i live
with a sort of talking alien perhaps you
do too oh but she's not a talking
intelligent alien you might reply well
first of all what'd you say about my cat
[ __ ] you and second of all all right
then how's about ants
well there's probably about a hundred
trillion of them on earth made up of
twelve thousand species they form
alliances raid other colonies and
practice division of labor just like us
working as nurses foragers warriors
matey with a door for a head matey has a
door for a head and they build societies
of a sort one colony in japan reportedly
held 300 million of the suckers made of
45 000 nests across 700 acres about the
same size as mark zuckerberg's hawaiian
estate a thriving metropolis and how
with communication with sound touch and
chemical cues pheromones ant pheromones
can signal anything from alarm there's
an intruder to i done a good trail come
see even to propaganda pheromones lying
about allegiances to get inside other
nests oh but those aren't talking
intelligent aliens either you might say
that's just mindless group cooperation
yeah could one of us build a space
program or an airliner or even a pencil
all by ourselves we look like ants from
not that far up but all right how about
bees then if you're having a lovely day
out as a honey bee and you come upon
some nectar you'll want to tell your
mates so it's back to the hive where you
perform this figure eight dance in which
you'll communicate the richness of the
nectar with the intensity of your twerk
and the location of the nectar with the
direction of your dance relative to the
sun it's called the waggle dance is that
language uh it depends how you feel
about bodria after a few drinks but
either way we'll never know because the
non-human communication story ends there
with insects unfortunately
except of course it [ __ ] doesn't what
about electric fish who use their
electric fields to chat about anything
from hi i'm a boyfish or a girlfish to
we're getting attacked as simultaneously
they're trailed by sharks who have
learned to eavesdrop on these electrical
conversations or dolphins who some
researchers think are naming themselves
with entirely unique whistles rather
impressive if true considering most of
us don't even have an original christian
name or cuttlefish who can display two
totally different messages on either
sides of their bodies simultaneously or
elephants who seem to be sending seismic
distress signals with their stamps that
can travel tens of miles distantly
through the ground or chimpanzees who
can learn and utilize hundreds of
symbols from human sign language it's
debatable whether they really understand
what they're saying but in any case they
can not only count with human numbers
but can outperform humans over and over
at memorizing number sequences or of
course to humpback whales and their
songs the songs are usually hierarchical
units build into phrases which build
into themes which build into songs they
compose and exchange these songs
together inside populations many songs
are only sung during breeding season so
something to do with getting laid but
many aren't sometimes they're used
before feeding sometimes just alone and
why do they sing at all we have no idea
but if the criteria for an alien we're
interested in is can do some technology
and communication has mind we don't
understand and evolved from beyond earth
many animals are nailing two out of
three of these and to the third one
there our last common ancestor with
parrots lived probably 300 million years
ago five times as far back as the
dinosaurs went extinct our last common
link with octopuses is likely about
twice that 750 million years back
animals might not be from an alien
planet but many are certainly from an
alien time which is not to say that
animals will be rivaling humans any time
soon they're busy with their own [ __ ]
often literally but until
extraterrestrials message us back if
it's different similars we're looking
for if it's unknowable minds we're after
haven't they been here the whole time
and is the problem really that they're
not smart enough to speak our languages
or that we're currently too daft to
understand theirs
it's got a door
fred